# nf-core/atacseq: Output

This document describes the output produced by the pipeline. Most of the plots are taken from the MultiQC report, which summarises results at the end of the pipeline.

## Pipeline overview
The pipeline is built using [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/). See [`main README.md`](../README.md) for a condensed listing of the pipeline, and the bioinformatics tools used at each step.

See [Illumina website](https://emea.illumina.com/science/sequencing-method-explorer/kits-and-arrays/atac-seq.html) for more information regarding the ATAC-seq protocol, and for an extensive list of publications.

The directories listed below will be created in the output directory after the pipeline has finished. All paths are relative to the top-level results directory.

## Library-level analysis

The initial QC and alignments are performed at the library-level e.g. if the same library has been sequenced more than once to increase sequencing depth. This has the advantage of being able to assess each library individually, and the ability to process multiple libraries from the same sample in parallel.

File names in the resulting directory (i.e. `bwa/library/`) will either have the '`.mkD.`' (**m**ar**k** **D**uplicates) or '`.clN.`' (**cl**ea**n**) suffix to denote files before and after read filtering, respectively.  

1. **Raw read QC**

    *Software*:  
    [FastQC](https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/trim_galore/)  

    *Description*:  
    FastQC gives general quality metrics about your reads. It provides information about the quality score distribution across your reads, the per base sequence content (%T/A/G/C). You get information about adapter contamination and other overrepresented sequences. For further reading and documentation see the [FastQC help](http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/Help/).

    *Output directories*:  
    * `fastqc/`  
    FastQC `*.html` files for read 1 (and read2 if paired-end) **before** adapter trimming.   
    * `fastqc/zips/`    
    FastQC `*.zip` files for read 1 (and read2 if paired-end) **before** adapter trimming.    

2. **Adapter trimming**

    *Software*:  
    [Trim Galore!](https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/trim_galore/)

    *Description*:  
    Trim Galore! is a wrapper tool around Cutadapt and FastQC to consistently apply quality and adapter trimming to FastQ files. By default, Trim Galore! will automatically detect and trim the appropriate adapter sequence. For most ATAC-seq datasets this will be the Nextera adapter sequence 'CTGTCTCTTATA'. See [`usage.md`](usage.md) for more details about the trimming options.

    *Output directories*:
    * `trim_galore/`  
      If `--saveTrimmed` is specified `*.fastq.gz` files **after** adapter trimming will be placed in this directory.
    * `trim_galore/logs/`    
      '*.log' files generated by Trim Galore!.
    * `trim_galore/fastqc/`    
      FastQC `*.html` files for read 1 (and read2 if paired-end) **after** adapter trimming.
    * `trim_galore/fastqc/zips/`    
      FastQC `*.zip` files for read 1 (and read2 if paired-end) **after** adapter trimming.

    *Plots*:  
    [MultiQC - Cutadapt trimmed sequence plot](images/mqc_cutadapt_plot.png)

3. **Alignment, duplicate marking and read filtering**

    *Software*:  
    [BWA](https://sourceforge.net/projects/bio-bwa/files/), [picard](https://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/), [SAMtools](https://sourceforge.net/projects/samtools/files/samtools/), [BEDTools](https://github.com/arq5x/bedtools2/), [BAMTools](https://github.com/pezmaster31/bamtools), [Pysam](http://pysam.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation.html)

    *Description*:  
    Adapter-trimmed reads are mapped to the reference assembly using BWA. A genome index is required to run BWA so if this isnt provided explicitly using the `--bwa_index_dir` and `bwa_index_base` parameters then it will be created automatically from the genome fasta input. The index creation process can take a while for larger genomes so it is possible to use the `--saveReference` parameter to save the indices for future pipeline runs, reducing processing times.

    Read duplicate marking is carried out using the Picard MarkDuplicates command. Duplicate reads are generally removed from the aligned reads to mitigate for fragments in the library that may have been sequenced more than once due to PCR biases. There is an option to keep duplicate reads with the `--keepDups` parameter but its generally recommend to remove them to avoid the wrong interpretation of the results. A similar option has been provided to keep reads that are multi-mapped - `--keepMultiMap`.

    Certain cell types and tissues yield an enormous fraction (typically 20–80%) of unusable sequences of mitochondrial origin. This is a known problem that is specific to ATAC-seq library preps - see [Montefiori et al. 2017](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-017-02547-w). There is an option to keep these reads using the `--keepMito` parameter but its generally recommended to remove these in order to get a more reliable assessment of the duplication rate from the rest of the genome.

    Other steps have been incorporated into the pipeline to clean the resulting alignments - see [`main README.md`](../README.md) for a more comprehensive listing, and the tools used at each step.

    *Output directories*:
    * `bwa/library/`  
      Filtered, coordinate sorted alignment files in [`*.bam`](https://samtools.github.io/hts-specs/SAMv1.pdf) format at the library-level. If `--saveAlignedIntermediates` is specified then the intermediate BAM files will be placed in this directory.
    * `bwa/library/flagstat/`    
      Multiple BAM files will be generated before the final filtered BAM file is created. The SAMtools `*.flagstat` files for a selection of these will be placed in this directory.
    * `bwa/library/idxstats/`    
      SAMtools `*.idxstats` files to determine the percentage of reads mapping to mitochondrial DNA.
    * `bwa/library/picard_metrics/`    
      Alignment QC files from picard CollectMultipleMetrics and the metrics file from MarkDuplicates: `*_metrics` and `*.metrics.txt`, respectively.
    * `bwa/library/picard_metrics/pdf/`    
      Alignment QC plot files in `*.pdf` format from picard CollectMultipleMetrics.

    *Plots*:  
    [MultiQC - SAMtools idxstats plot](images/mqc_samtools_idxstats_plot.png)  
    [MultiQC - Picard insert size plot](images/mqc_picard_insert_size_plot.png)  
    [MultiQC - Picard deduplication stats plot](images/mqc_picard_deduplication_plot.png)

## Replicate-level analysis

The library-level alignments associated with any given sample are merged at the replicate-level and subsequently used for the downstream analyses.

File names in the resulting directory (i.e. `bwa/replicate/`) will have the '`.mRp.`' suffix to denote **m**erging at the **R**e**p**licate-level.

1. **Alignment merging, duplicate marking and removal**

    *Software*:  
    [picard](https://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/), [SAMtools](https://sourceforge.net/projects/samtools/files/samtools/)

    *Description*:  
    Picard MergeSamFiles and MarkDuplicates are used in combination to merge the alignments, and for the re-marking and removal of duplicates. If you only have one library for any given replicate then the merging step isnt carried out because the library-level and replicate-level BAM files will be exactly the same.

    *Output directories*:
    * `bwa/replicate/`  
      Replicate-level, merged, coordinate sorted `*.bam` files after the re-marking and removal of duplicates.
    * `bwa/replicate/flagstat/`    
      SAMtools `*.flagstat` files associated with the final filtered merged BAM file.
    * `bwa/replicate/picard_metrics/`    
      MarkDuplicates `*.metrics.txt` file.

2. **Normalised bigWig files**

    *Software*:  
    [BEDTools](https://github.com/arq5x/bedtools2/), [wigToBigWig](http://hgdownload.soe.ucsc.edu/admin/exe/)  

    *Description*:  
    The [bigWig](https://genome.ucsc.edu/goldenpath/help/bigWig.html) format is in an indexed binary format useful for displaying dense, continuous data in Genome Browsers such as the [UCSC](https://genome.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgTracks) and [IGV](http://software.broadinstitute.org/software/igv/). This removes the need to load the much larger BAM files for data visualisation purposes which will be slower and result in memory issues. The coverage values represented in the bigWig file can also be normalised in order to be able to compare the coverage across multiple samples - this is not possible with BAM files. The bigWig format is also supported by various bioinformatics software for downstream processing such as meta-profile plotting.

    *Output directories*:
    * `bwa/replicate/bigwig/`  
      Normalised `*.bigWig` files scaled to 1 million mapped reads.

3. **TSS meta-profiles**

    *Software*:  
    [deepTools](https://deeptools.readthedocs.io/en/develop/)  

    *Description*:  
    Transcription start site (TSS) enrichment is another QC measure which is useful to ATAC-seq datasets. In theory, the open chromatin regions denoted by ATAC-seq signal should be enriched within the promoter regions of genes.

    *Output directories*:
    * `bwa/replicate/deeptools/`  
      TSS meta-profile `*.png` plot for coverage across all genes. Generated with deepTools *computeMatrix* and *plotProfile* commands.

    *Plots*:  
    [deepTools - TSS meta-profile plot](images/deeptools_tss_plot.png)

4. **Call peaks**

    *Software*:  
    [MACS2](https://github.com/taoliu/MACS), [HOMER](http://homer.ucsd.edu/homer/download.html), [R](https://www.r-project.org/)

    *Description*:   
    MACS2 is one of the most popular peak-calling algorithms for ChIPSeq data. For ATAC-seq data we are also looking for genome-wide regions of enrichment but in this case without comparison to a standard control sample (e.g. input DNA).  

    By default, the peaks are called with the MACS2 `--broad` parameter, and this is recommended for ATAC-seq data. If, however, you would like to call narrow peaks then please provide the `--narrowPeak` parameter when running the pipeline.

    [HOMER annotatePeaks.pl](http://homer.ucsd.edu/homer/ngs/annotation.html) is used to annotate the peaks relative to known genomic features. HOMER is able to use the annotation provided to the pipeline in the form of the `--gtf` file. Please note that some of the output columns will be blank because the annotation isnt provided using HOMER's in-built database format. However, the more important fields required for downstream analysis will be populated i.e. *Annotation*, *Distance to TSS* and *Nearest Promoter ID*.  

    Various QC plots per sample including number of peaks, fold-change distribution, FRiP score and peak to gene feature annotation are also generated by the pipeline. Where possible these have been integrated into the MultiQC report.  

    See [MACS2 outputs](https://github.com/taoliu/MACS#output-files) for a description of the output files generated by MACS2.

    *Output directories*:
    * `bwa/replicate/macs2/`  
      * MACS2 output files: `*.xls`, `*.broadPeak` or `*.narrowPeak`, `*.gappedPeak` and `*summits.bed`.  
        The files generated will depend on whether MACS2 has been run in *narrowPeak* or *broadPeak* mode.  
      * HOMER peak-to-gene annotation file: `*.annotatePeaks.txt`.
    * `bwa/replicate/macs2/qc`  
      * QC plots for MACS2 peaks: `macs_peak.mRp.plots.pdf`
      * QC plots for peak to gene feature annotation: `macs_annotatePeaks.mRp.plots.pdf`
      * MultiQC custom-content files for [FRiP score](https://genome.cshlp.org/content/22/9/1813.full.pdf+html) and peak count: `*.FRiP_mqc.tsv` and `*.count_mqc.tsv`, respectively.

    *Plots*:  
    [MultiQC - MACS2 total peak count plot](images/mqc_macs2_peak_count_plot.png)  
    [MultiQC - MACS2 peaks FRiP score plot](images/mqc_frip_score_plot.png)  
    [MultiQC - HOMER annotatePeaks peak to genomic feature ratio plot](images/mqc_annotatePeaks_feature_percentage_plot.png)  

5. **Create consensus set of peaks**

    *Software*:  
    [BEDTools](https://github.com/arq5x/bedtools2/)

    *Description*:  
    In order to perform the differential accessibility analysis we need to be able to carry out the read quantification for the same intervals across all of the samples in the experiment. To this end, the individual peaksets called per sample have to be merged together in order to create a consensus set of peaks.  

    Using the consensus peaks it is also possible to assess the degree of overlap between the peaks from a set of samples e.g. *Which consensus peaks contain peaks that are common to a given set of samples?*. This may be useful for downstream filtering of peaks based on whether they are called in multiple replicates/conditions. Please note that it is possible for a consensus peak to contain multiple peaks from the same sample. Unfortunately, this is sample-dependent but the files generated by the pipeline do have columns that report such instances and allow you to factor them into any further analysis.  

    *Output directories*:
    * `bwa/replicate/macs2/consensus/`  
      * Consensus peakset across all samples in `*.bed` format.
      * Consensus peakset across all samples in `*.saf` format. Required by featureCounts for read quantification.  
      * HOMER `*.annotatePeaks.txt` peak-to-gene annotation file for consensus peaks.   
      * Spreadsheet representation of consensus peakset across samples **with** gene annotation columns: `*.boolean.annotatePeaks.txt`.  
        The columns from individual peak files are included in this file along with the ability to filter peaks based on their presence or absence in multiple replicates/conditions.  
      * Spreadsheet representation of consensus peakset across samples **without** gene annotation columns: `*.boolean.txt`.  
        Same as file above but without annotation columns.  
      * [UpSetR](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/UpSetR/README.html) files to illustrate peak intersection: `*.boolean.intersect.plot.pdf` and `*.boolean.intersect.txt`.  

    *Plots*:  
    [R - UpSetR peak intersection plot](images/r_upsetr_intersect_plot.png)

6. **Read counting and differential accessibility analysis**

    *Software*:  
    [featureCounts](http://bioinf.wehi.edu.au/featureCounts/), [DESeq2](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/DESeq2.html), [R](https://www.r-project.org/),

    *Description*:  
    The featureCounts tool is used to count the number of reads relative to the consensus peakset across all of the samples. This essentially generates a file containing a matrix where the rows represent the consensus intervals, the columns represent all of the samples in the experiment, and the values represent the raw read counts.

    DESeq2 is more commonly used to perform differential expression analysis for RNA-seq datasets. However, it can also be used for ATAC-seq differential accessibility analysis, in which case you can imagine that instead of counts per gene for RNA-seq data we now have counts per accessible region.  

    The DESeq2 results are generated by the pipeline in various ways. You can load up the results across all of the comparisons in a single spreadsheet, or individual folders will also be created that contain the results specific to a particular comparison. For the latter, additional files will also be generated where the intervals have been pre-filtered based on a couple of standard FDR and fold-change thresholds. By default, all possible pairwise comparisons across the groups within the experiment are performed.  

    Please see [DESeq2 output](http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/DESeq2/inst/doc/DESeq2.html#differential-expression-analysis) for a description of the columns generated by DESeq2.

    *Output directories*:
    * `bwa/replicate/macs2/consensus/deseq2/`
        * `.featureCounts.txt` file for read counts across all samples relative to consensus peak set.
        * Differential accessibility `*.results.txt` spreadsheet containing results across all consensus peaks and all comparisons.  
        * `*.plots.pdf` file for PCA and hierarchical clustering.  
        * `*.log` file with information for number of genes differentially bound at different FDR and fold-change thresholds for each comparison.  
        * `*.dds.rld.RData` file containing R `dds` and `rld` objects generated by DESeq2.  
        * `R_sessionInfo.log` file containing information about R, the OS and attached or loaded packages.
    * `bwa/replicate/macs2/consensus/<COMPARISON>/`  
        * `*.results.txt` spreadsheet containing comparison-specific DESeq2 output for differential accessibility results across all peaks.   
        * Subset of above file for peaks that pass FDR <= 0.01 (`*FDR0.01.results.txt`), FDR <= 0.01 and fold-change >= 2 (`*FDR0.01.FC2.results.txt`), FDR <= 0.05 (`*FDR0.05.results.txt`) and FDR <= 0.05 and fold-change >= 2 (`*FDR0.05.FC2.results.txt`).  
        * BED files for peaks that pass FDR <= 0.01 (`*FDR0.01.results.bed`), FDR <= 0.01 and fold-change >= 2 (`*FDR0.01.FC2.results.bed`), FDR <= 0.05 (`*FDR0.05.results.bed`) and FDR <= 0.05 and fold-change >= 2 (`*FDR0.05.FC2.results.bed`).
        * MA, Volcano, clustering and scatterplots at FDR <= 0.01 and FDR <= 0.05: `*deseq2.plots.pdf`.  
    * `bwa/replicate/macs2/consensus/sizeFactors/`  
      Files containing DESeq2 sizeFactors per sample: `*.txt` and `*.RData`.

    *Plots*:  
    [MultiQC - featureCounts consensus peak read assignment plot](images/mqc_featureCounts_assignment_plot.png)  
    [MultiQC - DESeq2 PCA plot](images/mqc_deseq2_pca_plot.png)  
    [MultiQC - DESeq2 sample similarity plot](images/mqc_deseq2_sample_similarity_plot.png)  
    [R - DESeq2 MA plot](images/r_deseq2_ma_plot.png)  
    [R - DESeq2 Volcano plot](images/r_deseq2_volcano_plot.png)  

## Sample-level analysis

The library-level alignments associated with all of the replicates from the same experimental condition are also merged at the sample-level. This can be useful to increase the coverage for peak-calling and for other analyses that require high sequencing depth such as [motif footprinting](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3959825/). The analysis steps and directory structure for `bwa/replicate/` and `bwa/sample/` are almost identical.  

File names in the resulting directory (i.e. `bwa/sample/`) will have the '`.mSm.`' suffix to denote **m**erging at the **S**a**m**ple-level.

You can skip this portion of the analysis by specifying the `--skipMergeBySample` parameter.  

>NB: Replicate-level alignments will be used for read counting relative to the consensus sample-level peakset. This is the only way in which differential analysis can be performed at the sample-level.

## Aggregate analysis

1. **Present QC for the raw read, alignment, peak and differential accessibility results**

    *Software*:  
    [MultiQC](http://multiqc.info/)

    *Description*:  
    MultiQC is a visualisation tool that generates a single HTML report summarising all samples in your project. Most of the pipeline QC results are visualised in the report and further statistics are available within the report data directory.  

    Results generated by MultiQC collate pipeline QC from FastQC, TrimGalore, samtools flagstat, samtools idxstats, picard CollectMultipleMetrics, picard MarkDuplicates and featureCounts. The default [`multiqc config file`](../assets/multiqc/multiqc_config.yaml) also contains the provision for loading custom-content to report peak counts, FriP scores, peak to gene annnotation proportions, sample-similarity heatmaps and PCA plots.  

    The pipeline has special steps which allow the software versions used to be reported in the MultiQC output for future traceability.

    For more information about how to use MultiQC reports, see http://multiqc.info

    *Output directories*:
    * `multiqc/`  
      * `Project_multiqc_report.html` - a standalone HTML file that can be viewed in your web browser.
      * `Project_multiqc_data/` - directory containing parsed statistics from the different tools used in the pipeline.

2. **Create IGV session file**

    *Software*:  
    [IGV](https://software.broadinstitute.org/software/igv/)

    *Description*:  
    An IGV session file  will be created at the end of the pipeline containing the file names for the normalised bigWig tracks, peaks and differential sites generated by the pipeline. This avoids having to load all the data individually into IGV for visualisation.

    A dummy variable called `RESULTS_DIR` has been used to denote the path to the results directory in the `igv_session.xml` file. You will have to replace this with the full path to where the results will be stored on your system. If you replace `/home/patelh/working/projects/results/` in the command below with the full path to your results directory it should do the trick. It should also work for URLs if you prefer to load the data over the web.

    ```
    cat igv_session.xml | sed 's#RESULTS_DIR/#/home/patelh/working/projects/results/#g' > igv_session_correct_paths.xml
    ```

    The genome for the IGV session will be set to the path for the genome fasta file provided to the pipeline. If you prefer to use another path or an in-built genome provided by IGV just change the `genome` entry in the second-line of the session file.

    Once installed, open IGV, go to `File > Open Session` and select the `igv_session_correct_paths.xml` file for loading.

    >NB: If you arent using an in-built genome provided by IGV you will need to load the annotation yourself e.g. in .gtf and/or .bed format.

    *Output directories*:
    * `igv/`  
      `igv_session.xml` file.

    *Plots*:   
    [IGV screenshot](images/igv_screenshot.png)  

## Other results

1. **Reference genome files**

    *Software*:  
    [BWA](https://sourceforge.net/projects/bio-bwa/files/), [BEDTools](https://github.com/arq5x/bedtools2/), [SAMtools](https://sourceforge.net/projects/samtools/files/samtools/)

    *Description*:    
    If they dont exist already its possible to save the BWA genome indices and other reference genome files that are generated by the pipeline. This can be quite a time-consuming process so it permits their reuse for reruns of this pipeline or for other purposes.  

    *Output directories*:
    * `reference_genome/`  
      If the `--saveReference` parameter is provided then genome-specific files and alignment indices generated by the pipeline will be saved in this directory.

2. **Pipeline information**

    *Software*:  
    [Nextflow!](https://www.nextflow.io/)

    *Description*:  
    Nextflow provides excellent functionality for generating various reports relevant to the running and execution of the pipeline. This will allow you to trouble-shoot errors with the running of the pipeline, and also provide you with other information such as launch commands, run times and resource usage.

    See [Nextflow Tracing & visualisation](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/tracing.html).  

    *Output directories*:
    * `pipeline_info/`  
      Default reports generated by the pipeline are `atacseq_report.html`, `atacseq_timeline.html`, `atacseq_trace.txt` and `atacseq_dag.dot`.  
    * `Documentation/`  
      Additional reports and documentation generated by the pipeline i.e. `pipeline_report.html`, `pipeline_report.txt`, `results_description.html`.
